
              The most official Reddit community of all official Reddit communities. Your go-to place for Reddit updates, announcements, and news. Occasional frivolity.
            

    Ahoy there, Reddit!
  

    Communities across Reddit have been busy this summer, from showcasing user creativity to chatting about this year’s hottest movies and video games – which seem to have been released all at once. We’re featuring a few of those trending communities in this post in addition to some other cool cats (both literal and otherwise) that you can find on Reddit…just in case you missed it.
  

    📈TRENDING COMMUNITIES
  

    r/HyruleEngineering
  

    A collection of Hyrule’s most imaginative engineers. Tired of using the two-fan flier? Want to see the latest mech designs? Did you know your house can fly? If your Tears of the Kingdom creations inspire awe, solve problems, or solicit a giggle, this is the community for you.
  

    Check out this helicopter design by u/scalhoun03, and the further iteration improved by the community! Now if only there was a cargo hold for Korok disp…er..purposes.
  

    r/90s_kid
  

    Do you still remember when 30 was old? (Or the song that popularized that phrase back in the day?) How about the time Randy Travis guest starred on ‘Hey Arnold!’? Have you ever had a sip from one of these things? Grab your moon shoes and let it rip, 90s_kid is celebrating the culture, toys, cartoons, music, and everything else that made growing up in the 90s “All That.” Share your favorite Fannee Doolee (or Green Glass Door) in the comments and Come on down, you’re the next contestant on r/90s_kid!
  

    r/Cozygames
  

    A self-described haven for comfy games! What makes a game cozy, you ask? Great question, r/cozygames has the answer. Have you heard about Dinkum? Rakuen? Check out their mod-hosted cozy game of the week threads to fill your library with a little(wood) more coziness!
  

    r/BG3Builds
  

    Did you know Eldritch Blast is an evocation cantrip? That means it works with Evocation Wizard’s level 10 passive and you still have two levels to dip Warlock for Agonizing Blast, giving a potential +30 split between 3 beams without gear. If any of that has you reaching for your keyboard, you’ll love BG3Builds– a subreddit dedicated to documenting and theory-crafting character builds in Baldur’s Gate 3. Check out weekly class discussions and get feedback on your almost but not quite perfect build.
  

    r/TuxedoCats
  

    It wouldn’t be an ICYMI post without the finest cats on Reddit, and this go-round we’re featuring only the finest of the finely-dressed boys. It’s so hard to pick just one to feature here, so here’s u/EndyTheBanana’s gray tuxedo named Tośko:
  

    Whether it’s a black, white, or gray coat, r/TuxedoCats is your perfectly purloined proprietor providing your penchant for precious purring proclivity.
  

    r/Arborists
  

    A community full of professionals and hobbyists within the field of arboriculture. r/arborists is a space just as much for shop talk as for questions regarding health and the upkeep of trees. Keep your barky friends happy and healthy with the help of this leaf-loving community, like this sage advice on ginkgo tree growth and care by u/Piovertau!
  

    r/Foodbutforbabies
  

    It’s food…but for babies! Post what you’re making for your little one, be it processed mac ‘n cheese or organic bento– just the food though, hold the baby! If you need a taste (oh ho ho, we have a little fun here) of what you’ll find, check out this daycare meal prep by u/flailingbird.
  

    The full menu can be found on their original post, and for even more ideas, you can head over to r/foodbutforbabies!
  

    r/Whatsthissnake
  

    Do you have a photo of a snake you’d like identified? This is the community for you! r/whatsthissnake is a space that fosters an understanding of and appreciation for our serpentine friends.
  

    Check out this snake found by u/Glum_Wealth9995, an impressively photogenic Opheodrys vernalis, or Smooth Greensnake. Additional thanks to u/TheGreenRaccoon07 for the identification! Slither on over to whatsthissnake for more of your snake identification needs!
  

    r/ScrapMetal
  

    This is a community that revolves around the recycling of scrap metal as a source of income. Anybody can be environmentally friendly by recycling, and they can also make some money along the way. If you have any interesting articles on recycling junk metals, prices, tips, questions etc, feel free to post about it here! –We’re pulling straight from the sidebar for this feature, because I couldn’t say this better myself. If you need help identifying a metal (is it Gold or Aluminum Brass?), want to show off your scrap haul, or aren’t sure how to get started, r/scrapmetal will get you scrapping in no time.
  

    🗞 REDDIT, INC. HAPPENINGS
  

    Juuuuust at the end of July (it’s close enough!) we announced an improved logged-out web experience, which should provide logged-out users with better performance, search options, and several other quality of life features we discuss in that linked post.
  

    Also just prior to August we announced more in a series of updates to the accessibility of mod tools, specifically in relation to the functionality of screen readers. You can check out parts one and two of our accessibility update posts on the r/modnews posts linked here.
  

    💙 UPCOMING COMMUNITY EVENTS
  

    r/sewing is gearing up for one of the busiest times of year for the crafty community– the lead-in to Halloween. Check out their yearly megathread to get help with costume prep, answer your FAQs, find fabric and patterns, how to turn on a sewing machine, and everything else you need to dress to the nines (hells, that is).
  

    r/AskHistorians recently celebrated its twelve-year anniversary! Check out this community for professional answers to historical questions and maybe pop in to meme a little in the celebration thread here! After you’re done, maybe indulge in a little light reading on why Renaissance fairs use turkey legs or why mutton isn’t as popular in the States. Congratulations, r/AskHistorians!
  

    💙 ADMIN’S PICK
  

    Over the past month, r/comics experienced an impromptu cascade of self-referential content in which a one-off comic received its own on-Reddit extended universe. The lore got so deep it needed its own metathread to keep track of.
  

    And that does it for this month! Stay tuned for next month’s trending communities and a recap of Reddit-themed news you may have missed.
  

    Cheers!
  
